# py-packaging

This repo shows how to package, build python app and publication on pypi (The python packaging index).

In this tutorial, you’ll learn how to:

- Prepare your Python package for publication
- Handle versioning of your package
- Build your package and upload it to PyPI
- Understand and use different build systems

The python packaging standard is **reviewed** by `Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs)`, and **implemented** by the 
`Python Packaging Authority (PyPA)` working group.

The most important documents that define how Python packaging works are the following PEPs:

- [PEP 427](https://peps.python.org/pep-0427/) describes how wheels should be packaged.
- [PEP 440](https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/) describes how version numbers should be parsed.
- [PEP 508](https://peps.python.org/pep-0508/) describes how dependencies should be specified.
- [PEP 517](https://peps.python.org/pep-0517/) describes how a build backend should work.
- [PEP 518](https://peps.python.org/pep-0518/) describes how a build system should be specified.
- [PEP 621](https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/) describes how project metadata should be written.
- [PEP 660](https://peps.python.org/pep-0660/) describes how editable installs should be performed.

## 1. Prepare your Python package

There is no strict rule on how to organize the python package source. But we recommend you to use the below
organization.

```text
my_package/
│-- src/my_package/           # Package source code
│   │-- __init__.py       # Makes this a package
|   |-- __main__.py       # entry point of the package when run python -m my_package
│   │-- module1.py        # First module
│   │-- module2.py        # Second module
│   │-- subpackage1/       # A subpackage (optional)
│   │   │-- __init__.py
│   │   │-- submodule.py
│
│-- tests/                # Unit tests
│   │-- test_module1.py   # Tests for module1
│   │-- test_module2.py   # Tests for module2
│
│-- docs/                 # Documentation (optional)
│   │-- index.rst         # Main documentation file
│
│-- examples/             # Example scripts (optional)
│   │-- example_usage.py
│
|-- data/
|   |-- input.csv          # test input data
|   |-- output.parquet     # output example
|
│-- pyproject.toml        # Build system and dependency management (recommended)
│-- requirements.txt      # Dependencies list
│-- README.md             # Project overview and usage
│-- LICENSE               # License file
│-- .gitignore            # Git ignore file

```

> The s`rc/-` structure is recommended, it provides several advantages as your project grows. 
> You can read this [page](https://hynek.me/articles/testing-packaging/) for more information.
> You can also read this [article](https://realpython.com/python-application-layouts/) to learn different file layouts for
> different types of python application

### 1.1 src/my_package/ 

This folder contains all the source code. You can have simple modules (e.g. module1.py, etc.) or subpackages(subpackage1/, etc.)


The **__init__.py** defines what gets imported when import my_package is used.
The **__main__.py** is the entry point of the package. It will be executed when user run `python -m my_package`.

### 1.2 tests/

Contains unit tests using unittest or pytest.

### 1.3 docs/

It contains the documentation of the package. The format can be Sphinx documentation generated by the docstring or Markdown files.

### 1.4 examples/

Helps users understand how to use the package.

### 1.5 data/

The sample input data, or required data to run the package correctly.

###  1.6 Build System & Dependencies

pyproject.toml: Preferred way to define dependencies and package metadata.

requirements.txt: Lists dependencies for easy installation.

### 1.7 Metadata & Automation

README.md: Project documentation.
LICENSE: Defines the package’s license.
.gitignore: Specifies files to exclude from version control.


## 2. 

