# py-packaging

This repo shows how to package, build python app and publication on pypi (The python packaging index).

In this tutorial, you’ll learn how to:

- Prepare your Python package for publication
- Handle versioning of your package
- Build your package and upload it to PyPI
- Understand and use different build systems

The python packaging standard is **reviewed** by `Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs)`, and **implemented** by the 
`Python Packaging Authority (PyPA)` working group.

The most important documents that define how Python packaging works are the following PEPs:

- [PEP 427](https://peps.python.org/pep-0427/) describes how wheels should be packaged.
- [PEP 440](https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/) describes how version numbers should be parsed.
- [PEP 508](https://peps.python.org/pep-0508/) describes how dependencies should be specified.
- [PEP 517](https://peps.python.org/pep-0517/) describes how a build backend should work.
- [PEP 518](https://peps.python.org/pep-0518/) describes how a build system should be specified.
- [PEP 621](https://peps.python.org/pep-0621/) describes how project metadata should be written.
- [PEP 660](https://peps.python.org/pep-0660/) describes how editable installs should be performed.

## 1. Prepare your Python package

There is no strict rule on how to organize the python package source. But we recommend you to use the below
organization.

```text
my_package/
│-- src/my_package/           # Package source code
│   │-- __init__.py       # Makes this a package
|   |-- __main__.py       # entry point of the package when run python -m my_package
│   │-- module1.py        # First module
│   │-- module2.py        # Second module
│   │-- subpackage1/       # A subpackage (optional)
│   │   │-- __init__.py
│   │   │-- submodule.py
│
│-- tests/                # Unit tests
│   │-- test_module1.py   # Tests for module1
│   │-- test_module2.py   # Tests for module2
│
│-- docs/                 # Documentation (optional)
│   │-- index.rst         # Main documentation file
│
│-- examples/             # Example scripts (optional)
│   │-- example_usage.py
│
|-- data/
|   |-- input.csv          # test input data
|   |-- output.parquet     # output example
|
│-- pyproject.toml        # Build system and dependency management (recommended)
│-- requirements.txt      # Dependencies list
│-- README.md             # Project overview and usage
│-- LICENSE               # License file
│-- .gitignore            # Git ignore file

```

> The s`rc/-` structure is recommended, it provides several advantages as your project grows. 
> You can read this [page](https://hynek.me/articles/testing-packaging/) for more information.
> You can also read this [article](https://realpython.com/python-application-layouts/) to learn different file layouts for
> different types of python application

### 1.1 src/my_package/ 

This folder contains all the source code. You can have simple modules (e.g. module1.py, etc.) or subpackages(subpackage1/, etc.)


The **__init__.py** defines what gets imported when import my_package is used.
The **__main__.py** is the entry point of the package. It will be executed when user run `python -m my_package`.

### 1.2 tests/

Contains unit tests using unittest or pytest.

### 1.3 docs/

It contains the documentation of the package. The format can be Sphinx documentation generated by the docstring or Markdown files.

### 1.4 examples/

Helps users understand how to use the package.

### 1.5 data/

The sample input data, or required data to run the package correctly.

###  1.6 Build System & Dependencies

pyproject.toml: Preferred way to define dependencies and package metadata.

requirements.txt: Lists dependencies for easy installation.

### 1.7 Metadata & Automation

README.md: Project documentation.
LICENSE: Defines the package’s license.
.gitignore: Specifies files to exclude from version control.


## 2. A real world example


Now we will use a real world project to simulate how to build a python package.

### 2.1 Configuration

You can find the `config.toml` in `src/stock_catcher`. We store the file name which contains 
the French CAC 40 stock ticker.

```toml
[stock]
cac_40="CAC40_2024.csv"
```
TOML is a configuration file format that has gained popularity lately. Python uses it for the pyproject.toml file that 
you’ll learn about later. To dive deeper into TOML, check out this [tutorial](https://realpython.com/python-toml/#read-toml-documents-with-tomli-and-tomllib).
`tomllib` library has been added to python standard library since python 3.11. So you should be able to read `toml`
easily in python.

TOML files contain `key-value pairs` separated into sections, or tables. Our config file contains only one 
section, `stock`, with one key, `cac_40`.


### 2.2 __init__.py

The `__init__.py` file represents the root of your package. It is executed `when the package is imported for the first 
time in a Python session.`

It should usually be kept quite simple, but it’s a good place to put package constants, documentation, and so on.

In our example, we use `importlib.resources` to get the path of `config.toml` based on the package. This is especially 
helpful when you publish your package to PyPI and don’t have full control over where your package is installed and 
how it’s used. Resource files might even end up inside zip archives.

```python

# Standard library imports
from importlib import resources

print("Executing __init__.py")

# Using try except ensures that you use tomllib if it’s available and that you fall back to tomli if it’s not.
try:
    import tomllib
except ModuleNotFoundError:
    # Third party imports
    import tomli as tomllib


# Version of the package
# Specifying __version__ is `strictly speaking` not necessary
# The importlib.metadata machinery uses project metadata to find version numbers. 
__version__ = "0.0.1"
# However, it’s still a useful convention to follow, and tools like Setuptools and Flit can use it to automatically


# Read the CAC40 stock ticker file path from the config file of package stock-catcher
_cfg = tomllib.loads(resources.read_text("stock_catcher", "config.toml"))

CAC40 = _cfg["stock"]["cac_40"]
```


### 2.3 __main__.py

The `__main__.py` is a special file inside a Python package that makes the `package executable using python -m package_name`.

Unlike `__init__.py`, it will not be executed during import. It will be only executed when `python -m my_package`
(run package as a script) is called

### 2.4 catcher.py

This module contains some functions which can get stock information and filter them based on certain user defined 
condition.

The below import is interesting. Because it will not work b default, because `stock_catcher` package is not recognized
in the current python env.

```python
from stock_catcher import CAC40
```

To install the `stock_catcher` package in current python virtual env. you can use the below command

```shell
# install the package in editable mode, any change will be updated into the python virtual env
pip install -e /path/to/package

# in our case
pip install -e /home/pliu/git/py-packaging/src/stock_catcher

# or you can go the folder, and call the command on current folder
cd /home/pliu/git/py-packaging
 python -m pip install -e .
```

> To do the pip install, it requires you to have a valid pyproject.toml.
> 
## 3. How to use a package

The most common way to call a python module in a package is call the python file of the module.
Below is an example
```shell
# if the module contains a main method, the main method will be called
python cacher.py

```

You can also use the -m option, it runs a script by specifying its module name instead of the filename:

```shell
# if the module contains a main method, the main method will be called
python -m cacher
```

## 4. Prepare the package for publication

### 4.1 Choose a catchy package name

All packages on PyPI need to have **unique names**. There are now several hundred thousand packages on PyPI, so 
chances are that your favorite name is already taken.

We will try to use the name `stock_catcher`, if it's already be taken, then we will add some prefix. For example
we can go `pf_stock_catcher`.

> The package name will be used to install the package(pip install stock_catcher).

**The PyPI package name does not need to match the package name**. For example, you can named the package as `stock_catcher`
in PyPI, after installation, the package can be called `catcher` for import(import catcher). 

The best practice is to keep them the same to avoid naming conflict. Because in one python environment, you cannot
have two packages which have the same name.


### 4.2 The pyproject.toml

The `pyproject.toml` file is the most important file when you want to publish a python package. It specifies: 
- the build system of the package.
- the package metadata (e.g. version, description, licence, etc.)
- the package dependencies
- the entry points
- the documentation location




#### 4.2.1 Configure a build system for your package

A **build system** is responsible for creating the actual files that you’ll upload to PyPI, typically in the [wheel](https://realpython.com/python-wheels/) 
or the [source distribution (sdist)](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/source-distribution-format/) 
format. For a long time, this was done by [distutils](https://docs.python.org/3.11/library/distutils.html) or 
[setuptools](https://setuptools.pypa.io/). However, [PEP 517](https://peps.python.org/pep-0517/) and [PEP 518](https://peps.python.org/pep-0518/) 
introduced a way to specify `custom build systems` (e.g. Poetry, flit).

In this tutorial, we only show how to use **setuptools** as our `build system`. The main difference of these build systems
is how you configure your package and build command to build and upload the package. 

You can specify `setuptools` as your build system by adding the following lines to `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[build-system]
requires      = ["setuptools>=61.0.0", "wheel"]
build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"
```

> You can notice the build-system specification stats with [build-system].

#### 4.2.2 Specify project metadata

The `minimal project information` that you must include in your `pyproject.toml` is the following:

- **name**: specifies the name of your package as it will appear on PyPI.
- **version**: sets the current version of your package.

All other attributes are optional, but we recommend you to provide as much information as possible.

- **classifiers**: describes your project using a list of classifiers. You should use these as they make your project more searchable.
- **dependencies**: lists any dependencies your package has to third-party libraries. `stock_cacher` depends on pandas
yfinance, and tomli.
- **project.urls**: adds links that you can use to present additional information about your package to your users. 
                  You can include several links here.

```toml
[project]
name = "stock_catcher"
version = "0.0.1"
description = "Read the latest stock news"
readme = "README.md"
authors = [{ name = "Pengfei", email = "liu.pengfei@hotmail.fr" }]
license = { file = "LICENSE" }
classifiers = [
    "License :: OSI Approved :: MIT License",
    "Programming Language :: Python",
    "Programming Language :: Python :: 3",
]
keywords = ["cac40", "stock", "finance"]
requires-python = ">=3.9"

dependencies = ["pandas >= 2.2.0", 
                 "yfinance", 
                 'tomli; python_version < "3.13"']

    [project.optional-dependencies]
    build = ["build", "twine"]
    dev = ["black", "bumpver", "isort", "mypy", "pytest"]

    [project.scripts]
    stock_catcher = "stock_catcher.__main__:main"

    [project.urls]
    repository    = "https://github.com/pengfei99/py-packaging"
    documentation = "https://github.com/pengfei99/py-packaging/blob/main/docs/packaging_python_scripts.md"
```

> You can notice the project specification stats with [project]. It can have subsections [project.optional-dependencies],
> [project.scripts], [project.urls]. The subsection name starts with <parent-section-name>.<sub-name>


##### 4.2.2.1 Take care project dependencies

You should list all `third-party libraries that aren’t part of the standard library` in the dependencies section. This
 list will be used by pip to resolve dependencies any time your package is installed. So if one library is missing, your
package will raise runtime error.

In the below example, we show a few possibilities that you can use when specifying dependencies, including 
- version specifiers: pandas >= 2.2.0 means pandas version must be 2.2.0 or later
- environment markers: tomli; python_version < "3.13" means tomli can be any version, but is only required on 
                     Python 3.10 or earlier You can also specify different operating systems with it.

```toml
dependencies = ["pandas >= 2.2.0", 
                 "yfinance", 
                 'tomli; python_version < "3.13"']
```

When adding packages to the dependency list, you should follow the below rules:

- `Only list your direct dependencies`. For example, we use `pandas`, but pandas uses `numpy`, as we don't use `numpy` directly, so it’s not specified.
- Never pin your dependencies to one particular version with ==.
- Use >= to add a lower bound if you depend on functionality that was added in a particular version of your dependency.
- Use < to add an upper bound if you worry that a dependency may break compatibility in a major version upgrade. 
      In this case, you should diligently test such upgrades and remove or increase the upper bound if possible.

Note that these rules hold when you’re configuring a package that you’re making available for others. 
If `you’re deploying your package`, then you should `pin your dependencies inside a virtual environment`.



##### 4.2.2.2 Use pip-tools

The `pip-tools` project is a great way to manage `pinned dependencies`. It comes with a pip-compile command that 
can `create or update a complete list of dependencies`.

As an example, say that you’re deploying `stock_catcher` into a virtual environment. You can then create a 
`reproducible environment with pip-tools`. In fact, pip-compile can work directly with your `pyproject.toml` file:

```shell
# install pip tools
pip install pip-tools

# build the requirements.txt with pip-tools 
pip-compile pyproject.tom
```

##### 4.2.2.3 Handle optional dependencies

We list all required dependencies to run the package in `dependencies`. For dev or build purpose, we may need
more optional libraries. In our case, in `[project.optional-dependencies]`, we define two more environments:
 - build: For build purpose, we need the below package
         - build: A simple, correct Python build frontend.
         - twine: is a utility for publishing Python packages on PyPI.  
 - dev : For dev purpose, we need the below packages
         - black : python source code formater, run `black {source_file_or_directory}`
         - bumpver: With the CLI command bumpver, you can search for and update version strings in your project files.
         - isort: sort imports alphabetically and automatically separate into sections and by type in a source file 
         - mypy is a Python linter which can catch many programming errors by analyzing the code. 
         - pytest for unit test

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
    build = ["build", "twine"]
    dev = ["black", "bumpver", "isort", "mypy", "pytest"]
```

By default, optional dependencies aren’t included when a package is installed. You can use the `--extra` option 
when calling `pip-compile`:

```shell
# This creates a pinned requirements.txt file that includes both your regular and development dependencies.
pip-compile --extra dev pyproject.toml
```

After the `pip-compile`, a complete `requirements.txt` will be generated which contains all required packages citations.
You can install these packages into your python virtual environment by using the below command

```shell
# sync will remove existing but not required package from the env
pip-sync

# install all required package without deleting existing package
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

#### 4.2.3. Specify project entry point

- **project.scripts**: creates command-line scripts that call functions within your package. 
          In our case, the stock_catcher command will call the main() within the `stock_catcher.__main__` module.
         
There are three ways to config the entry point of a package:
- **project.scripts**: specify application CLI entry point
- **project.gui-scripts**: specify GUI applications entry point
- **project.entry-points**: specify [plugins](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/creating-and-discovering-plugins/#using-package-metadata) entry point


In our case, we use `stock_catcher.__main__:main` the `main()` method of `__main__.py` in package `stock_catcher` as the
script entry point of our application. In another word, when the package is installed, you run command `stock_catcher`,
the `stock_catcher.__main__:main` will be exectued.

```toml
 [project.scripts]
    stock_catcher = "stock_catcher.__main__:main"
```

### 4.3 Document your package

At a minimum, you should include a README file with your project. A good README should quickly `describe 
your project`, as well as `explain how to install and use` your package.

In pyproject.toml, you can specify the location of your readme.

```toml
readme = "README.md"
```

The readme file should be in `Markdown` or [reStructuredText](http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html) as formats 
for project descriptions.  If you don’t need any of the advanced features of reStructuredText, then you’re usually 
better off using Markdown for your README. It’s simpler and has wider support outside of PyPI.

You can have more details in other repo, you can specify them in ` [project.urls]`. For example, in our case, we specify
a git repo for source code, and a more detailed documentation.

```toml
    [project.urls]
    repository    = "https://github.com/pengfei99/py-packaging"
    documentation = "https://github.com/pengfei99/py-packaging/blob/main/docs/packaging_python_scripts.md"
```

### 4.4 Test your package

Tests are useful when you’re developing your package, and you should include them. As noted, you won’t cover testing 
in this tutorial, but you can have a look at the tests of reader in the tests/ source code directory.

You can learn more about testing in [Effective Python Testing With Pytest](https://realpython.com/pytest-python-testing/), 
and get some hands-on experience with test-driven development (TDD) in [Build a Hash Table in Python With TDD](https://realpython.com/python-hash-table/) 
and [Python Practice Problems: Parsing CSV Files](https://realpython.com/python-interview-problem-parsing-csv-files/).

When preparing your package for publication, you should be conscious of the role that tests play. They’re typically 
only interesting for developers, so they should `not be included` in the package that you distribute through PyPI.

Later versions of Setuptools are quite good at code discovery and will normally include your source code in the 
package distribution but leave out your tests, documentation, and similar development artifacts.

You can control exactly what’s included in your package by using find directives in pyproject.toml. 
See the [Setuptools documentation](https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/package_discovery.html#custom-discovery) 
for more information.

### 4.5 Versioning your package

Your package needs to have a version. Furthermore, `PyPI will only let you upload a particular version of your package`. 
In other words, if you want to update your package on PyPI, then you need to increase the version number first. 
This is a good thing because it helps guarantee reproducibility: two environments with the same version of a given 
package should behave the same.

There are many different [versioning schemes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_versioning) that you can use. 
For Python projects, [PEP 440](https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/) gives some recommendations. 
However, to be flexible, the description in that PEP is complicated. 
For a simple project, you should stick with a simple versioning scheme.

#### 4.5.1 Semantic versioning scheme

[Semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) is a good default scheme to use, although it’s not perfect. 
You specify the version as three numerical components, for instance 1.2.3. The components are called **MAJOR, MINOR, and PATCH**
respectively. The following are recommendations about when to increment each component:

- Increment the MAJOR version when you make incompatible API changes.
- Increment the MINOR version when you add functionality in a backwards compatible manner.
- Increment the PATCH version when you make backwards compatible bug fixes. (Source)

> You should reset PATCH to 0 when you increment MINOR, and reset both PATCH and MINOR to 0 when you increment MAJOR.
> 

#### 4.5.2 Handle version with bumpver

Often, you want to specify the version number in different files within your project. For example, the version number 
is mentioned in both `pyproject.toml` and `stock_catcher/__init__.py`. To help you make sure that version 
numbers stay consistent, you can use a tool like **BumpVer**.

```shell
# install the package
pip install bumpver

# create bumpver config in pyproject.toml
bumpver init

```

The above command will generate the below lines in `pyproject.toml` file

```toml
[tool.bumpver]
current_version = "0.0.1"
version_pattern = "MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH"
commit_message  = "bump version {old_version} -> {new_version}"
commit          = true
tag             = true
push            = false

    [tool.bumpver.file_patterns]
    "pyproject.toml" = [
        'current_version = "{version}"',
        'version = "{version}"',
    ]
    "src/stock_catcher/__init__.py" = ["{version}"]
```

This conf contains two important parts:
- how the bumpver versioning the project, and interaction with git
- all version specifications in the `pyproject.toml` and `project source code(__init__.py)`

If you want to update a minor version, you can do the following

```shell
# minor update
bumpver update --minor

# major update
bumpver update --major

# use --dry option to view what will be changed
bumpver update --minor --dry
```

> Any error or warning during the run will stop bumpver to do the version update. 
> You must keep the git working directory clean before you run the bumpver update
> 
> 
### 4.6 Add Resource Files to Your Package

Sometimes, you’ll have files inside your package that aren’t source code files(e.g. data files, binaries, documentation, 
configuration files, etc).

To make sure such files are included when your project is built, you use a manifest file. For many projects, you 
don’t need to worry about the manifest: by default, Setuptools includes all source code files and README files in the build.

For other file formats, you need to create a file named **MANIFEST.in** next to `pyproject.toml` in your project’s 
base directory. This file specifies rules for which files to include and which files to exclude. 

Below is an example, we include our toml, and csv in our project.

```text
# MANIFEST.in

include src/stock_catcher/*.toml
include src/stock_catcher/data/*.csv
```

For more details, you can visit [manifest doc](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/using-manifest-in/). The
 [check-manifest](https://pypi.org/project/check-manifest/) tool can be useful when you have complicated manifest


### 4.7 License Your Package

If you’re sharing your package with others, then you need to add a license to your package that explains how 
others are allowed to use your package. You should choose one of the [many licenses](https://choosealicense.com/appendix/) 
already available.

You should add a `file named LICENSE` to your project that contains the text of the license you choose. You can then 
reference this file in `pyproject.toml` to make the license visible on PyPI.

```toml
license = { file = "LICENSE" }
```

### 4.8 Install Your Package Locally

Normally, pip does a regular install, which places a package into your `site-packages/` folder. If you install your 
local project, then the source code will be copied to site-packages/. The effect of this is that later changes that 
you make won’t take effect. `You’ll need to reinstall your package first`.

This is a way of using pip to install your package locally in a way that lets you edit your code after it’s installed.

Editable installs have been formalized in `PEP 660`.

```shell
# go to the root dir of your package, in our case,
cd /home/pliu/git/py-packaging

# install the pacakge with -e or --editable flag
pip install -e .
```

Once you’ve successfully installed your project, it’s available inside your environment, independent of your 
current directory. Additionally, your scripts are set up so you can run them. Recall that `stock_catcher = "stock_catcher.__main__:main"`
Now try to run 

```shell
(venv) $ stock_catcher
```

or in python shell

```python
from stock_catcher import catcher
    
catcher.get_default_cac_file_path()
```

As your package is installed as `editable`, you can modify the code and observe the output with the above command.

## 5 Publish your package to PyPI

If you don’t already have an account on PyPI, then now is the time to [register your account on PyPI](https://pypi.org/account/register/).
For testing, you should also [register an account on TestPyPI](https://test.pypi.org/account/register/). 

Once you have registered your account, you should be able to generate a token which allows you to upload your package
to PyPI.

```shell
# create a .pypirc in your home directory
vim ~/.pypirc

# put the below lines, and replace the pypi-token by your token
[pypi]
  username = __token__
  password = pypi-token

```

To build and upload your package to PyPI, you’ll use two tools called `Build and Twine`. 
You can install them using pip as usual:

```shell
pip install build twine
```

### 5.1 Build your Package

Packages on PyPI aren’t distributed as plain source code. Instead, they’re wrapped into distribution packages. 
The most common formats for distribution packages are `source archives` and `Python wheels`.

A source archive consists of your source code and any supporting files wrapped into one tar file.
A wheel is essentially a `zip archive containing your code`. You should provide both source archives and wheels 
for your package. `Wheels are usually faster and more convenient for your end users, while source archives provide 
a flexible backup alternative.

```shell
# build the package
python -m build

## outupt example
Successfully built stock_catcher-1.0.0.tar.gz and stock_catcher-1.0.0-py3-none-any.whl


# check the build package with twine
twine check dist/*

# output example
Checking dist/stock_catcher-1.0.0-py3-none-any.whl: PASSED
Checking dist/stock_catcher-1.0.0.tar.gz: PASSED


# upload to test pypi
twine upload -r testpypi dist/*
 
# upload to pypi
twine upload dist/*

# output example
Uploading stock_catcher-1.0.0-py3-none-any.whl
100% ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━ 32.6/32.6 kB • 00:00 • 13.4 MB/s
Uploading stock_catcher-1.0.0.tar.gz
100% ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━ 34.1/34.1 kB • 00:00 • 27.5 MB/s

View at:
https://pypi.org/project/stock-catcher/1.0.0/

```

> The .whl is just a zip file, you can unzip it and check if it contains all the files that you need(e.g. data, conf, etc.
specified in manifest.in).



## 6. Install your package via PyPI

Once after you publish the package in PyPI, you can install it with `pip`. First, create a new virtual environment 
and activate it. Then run the following command:

```shell
(venv) $ pip install stock_catcher

# you can also install the dev version with the optional dependencies
(venv) $ pip install stock_catcher[dev]

```

## 7. other Build system

**Flit** is a great little project that aims to “make the easy things easy” when it comes to packaging (source). 
`Flit doesn’t support advanced packages like those creating C extensions`, and in general, it doesn’t give you many 
choices when setting up your package. Instead, Flit subscribes to the philosophy that there should be one obvious 
workflow to publish a package.


**Poetry** is another tool that you can use to build and upload your package. Compared to Flit, Poetry has more 
features that can help you during the development of your packages, including powerful `dependency management`.